docs: add guide for `neondatabase/toolkit` (#2849)
neondatabase/website: content/guides/neondatabase-toolkit.md

---
title: Neon Database Toolkit for AI Agents
subtitle: Rapidly provision, manage, and interact with Neon Postgres databases in your AI agent workflows
author: dhanush-reddy
createdAt: '2025-01-29T00:00:00.000Z'
updatedOn: '2025-01-29T00:00:00.000Z'
---

The AI landscape is poised for its next "ChatGPT moment" - not with smarter chatbots, but with **autonomous AI agents** that complete real-world tasks. These next-gen assistants go beyond answering questions to independently booking flights, analyzing data trends, and even managing cloud infrastructure.

## The AI Agent revolution

- **Task automation**: Agents now execute multi-step workflows using natural language instructions
- **Environmental awareness**: They interact with apps/APIs like digital employees
- **Persistent memory**: Maintain context across sessions like human colleagues

## The Database challenge

> For these agents to thrive, they need infrastructure that matches their dynamic nature. This is where tools like Neon's database toolkit come in. The `@neondatabase/toolkit` simplifies data management for AI agents. It provides a seamless way to create, manage, and interact with Postgres databases, enabling agents to store, retrieve, and analyze data with ease.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these agents to thrive, they need infrastructure that matches their dynamic nature. This is where tools like Neon's database toolkit come in. The `@neondatabase/toolkit` simplifies data management for AI agents, providing them with an efficient way to create, manage, and interact with Postgres databases.
.
```

| Capability           | Agent Benefit                                                                                                                                                                |
| -------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Databases in seconds | Neon lets you create fully working Postgres databases almost instantly. No more waiting around – your agent can start working with data right away.                          |
| Scales easily        | Neon's serverless design automatically adjusts to your agent's needs, whether it's a quiet period or a busy time. You only pay for what you actually use, which saves money. |
| Full Postgres power  | Your agents get all the reliability and features of Postgres, a database trusted by developers everywhere.                                                                   |
| Micro Workloads      | Neon's cost-effective design is perfect for agents that only need a database for specific tasks. You don't have to pay for database resources when they aren't being used.   |

> | Cost-optimized       | Ideal for AI agents with varying workloads. You only pay for what you use, which is great for agents that have quiet periods or only need a database for specific tasks.     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Cost-optimized       | Ideal for AI agents with varying workloads, which is great for agents that have quiet periods or only need a database for specific tasks.     |
```

> The `@neondatabase/toolkit` takes all the best things about Neon and puts them into an easy-to-use software kit (SDK). This toolkit is specifically designed to make database interaction super easy for AI agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@neondatabase/toolkit` takes all the best things about Neon and puts them into an easy-to-use software development kit (SDK). This toolkit is specifically designed to make database interaction super easy for AI agents.
```

           (gen_random_uuid(), 'agentUser2', 'agent.user2@example.com');
  `;

  // Run the AI Agent's SQL to add user data
  await toolkit.sql(project, agentInsertUserQuery);
  console.log("User data added using the AI agent's SQL.");

  // Perform more SQL operations as needed...

  // Delete the Project (Database) - Clean up when the agent is finished
  await toolkit.deleteProject(project);
  console.log(`Project ${project.id} deleted.`);
}

runAgentWorkflow().catch(console.error);
```

**Key takeaways from this example**

- **Quick setup:** Just a few lines of code to get a fully working database ready for your agent.
- **Clear and simple:** The code is easy to understand, showing how the toolkit focuses on making things simple for developers and agents.
- **Automatic cleanup:** The `deleteProject` function makes sure resources are freed up when the agent is done.

## Conclusion

`@neondatabase/toolkit` takes away the complexity of databases, letting you concentrate on building smarter and more powerful AI agents. It’s the fastest way to connect your agents to data, helping them learn, think, and perform using the power of serverless Postgres.

> For more advanced uses, remember that the toolkit gives you access to the complete Neon API through `toolkit.apiClient`. This allows for more detailed customization and integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more advanced uses, remember that the toolkit gives you access to the complete [Neon API](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/getting-started-with-neon-api) through `toolkit.apiClient`. This allows for more detailed customization and integration.
```

## Resources

- [@neondatabase/toolkit on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@neondatabase/toolkit)
- [@neon/toolkit on JSR](https://jsr.io/@neon/toolkit)

> - [Neon Documentation](https://neon.tech/docs/introduction)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Neon Documentation](https://neon.tech/docs/introduction)
- [Neon API Reference](https://api-docs.neon.tech/reference/getting-started-with-neon-api)
- [Neon API keys](/docs/manage/api-keys#creating-api-keys)
```
